### How are groups controlled in bundler?

Generally speaking, the assumption is that there will be stateful data local to
the project by using `bundle install --without test` (and similar) invocations.

It works fine in a stateful world like pretty much any deployments using the
classic package management strategies.

This is saved in the local configuration with the `with` and `without` entries.

> `without`  
> A space-separated list of groups referencing gems to skip during installation.
>
> `with`  
> A space-separated list of groups referencing gems to include during installation.

— [`bundle-config(1)`](https://bundler.io/man/bundle-config.1.html)

While this is saved as `.bundle/config` this way, any options can also be
defined through the environment by capitalizing it and prefixing with `BUNDLE_`.
Thus, `BUNDLE_WITH` and `BUNDLE_WITHOUT` would be equivalent.

Any gem groups can be skipped by executing with `BUNDLE_WITHOUT=group:list:here`.

The description from the configuration manpage is somewhat misleading. The
`with` configuration is lacking precision in its behaviour. It is a valid
interpretation that using `BUNDLE_WITH=development` would strictly use the
`development` group.

It does not.

This is the implementation bundler uses for groups:

  - https://github.com/rubygems/rubygems/blob/427c047e701eabd164f2ce8195feb4ae6f2c802d/bundler/lib/bundler/definition.rb#L798-L800
  - https://github.com/rubygems/rubygems/blob/427c047e701eabd164f2ce8195feb4ae6f2c802d/bundler/lib/bundler/definition.rb#L279-L281

The actual behaviour is that **all** non-optional groups are used, except those
listed in `without`, and augmented with any optional groups in `with`.

With some re-ordering, here's a pseudo-code explanation of the groups used by
a bundler invocation:

```
  NON_OPTIONAL ← ALL_GROUPS - OPTIONAL_GROUPS
  REQUESTED_GROUPS ← NON_OPTIONAL - WITHOUT + WITH
```


### The poor workaround

It would be possible to work around the issue by using the `BUNDLE_WITHOUT`
environment variable and including all groups that are non-optional and
unwanted.

This option, though, would require adding an additional indirection layer with
wrappers. This may look like a passable solution, but relying on the environment
and additional wrappers is brittle. Anything looking at `$0` or `$PROGRAM_NAME`
could refer to the wrong thing and end-up bypassing wrappers.


### The robust workaround

Since optional groups are removed from non-optional groups, we can attain the
desired results by editing the Gemfile during the build, and appending
`group` blocks with `optional: true`.

With this, no environment manipulation is needed, no executable wrappers are
added in the mix. The only difference is there is an added step during build
that appends "configuration-like" lines in the Gemfile.

In the end, it's basically like adding this to the end of your file:

```diff
+
+group :test, optional: true do end
+group :development, optional: true do end
```

This was achievable since `gemset.nix` includes the group information for all
groups. From there the lists can be `unique`'d and the set subtraction
`OPTIONAL_GROUPS = ALL_GROUPS - REQUESTED_GROUPS` gives us the groups to ignore.


### Other ways forward

As alternatives, or really as proper fixes, there are at least two things that
could be done.


#### Implement *requested groups* in Nixpkgs bundlerEnv

This approach is likely desirable to contribute back upstream. Though we can
forego the Gemfile modifications, and instead rely on the *existing* wrappers
where `BUNDLE_*` is configured.

 - https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/4c6f337c48eb06c3cded4652bf1445241901d828/pkgs/development/ruby-modules/bundled-common/gen-bin-stubs.rb

It's okay to be done in *these* wrappers, as they do not rely on `exec` calls
to work, but instead `load` the gems.

The basic implementation would be the same, but instead of adding
"configuration-like" lines in the Gemfile, the groups would be added to
`BUNDLE_WITHOUT`.


#### Implement *requested groups* in Bundler

This would be the best way forward with regards to contributing back upstream.
Though it would also require a lot more work to do correctly and completely.

The basic idea would be to add a `requested_groups` setting, which when present
is used directly for `#requsted_groups`

  - https://github.com/rubygems/rubygems/blob/427c047e701eabd164f2ce8195feb4ae6f2c802d/bundler/lib/bundler/definition.rb#L798-L800

This would be helpful for any non-stateful systems where only a part of the
gem groups are installed, not only for Nix and Nix-like systems.

Within Nixpkgs we would then be able to use `BUNDLE_REQUESTED_GROUPS=default`
to correctly handle the problem.
